Updates for -01 submission (#37)
ietf-rats/draft-birkholz-rats-epoch-marker: draft-ietf-rats-epoch-markers.md

  IANA.cwt:
  IANA.cbor-tags:

entity:
  SELF: "RFCthis"

--- abstract

> This document defines Epoch Markers as a way to establish a notion of freshness among actors in a distributed system.
> Epoch Markers are similar to "time ticks" and are produced and distributed by a dedicated system, the Epoch Bell.
> Systems that receive Epoch Markers do not have to track freshness using their own understanding of time (e.g., via a local real-time clock).
> Instead, the reception of a certain Epoch Marker establishes a new epoch that is shared between all recipients.
> This documents defines Epoch Marker types, including CBOR time tags, RFC 3161 TimeStampToken, or nonce-like structures, as well as a CWT Claim to embed Epoch Markers in RFC 8392 CBOR Web Tokens as a vehicle for signed protocol messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines Epoch Markers as a means to establish a notion of freshness among actors in a distributed system.
Epoch Markers are similar to "time ticks" and are produced and distributed by a dedicated system known as the Epoch Bell.
Systems receiving Epoch Markers do not need to track freshness using their own understanding of time (e.g., via a local real-time clock).
Instead, the reception of a specific Epoch Marker establishes a new epoch that is shared among all recipients.
This document defines Epoch Marker types, including CBOR time tags, RFC 3161 TimeStampToken, nonce-like structures, and a CWT Claim to embed Epoch Markers in RFC 8392 CBOR Web Tokens, which serve as vehicles for signed protocol messages.
```

The entire {{Appendix A of -rats-arch}} deals solely with the topic of freshness, which is in itself an indication of how relevant, and complex, it is to establish a trusted and shared understanding of freshness in a RATS system.

This document defines Epoch Markers as a way to establish a notion of freshness among actors in distributed systems.
Epoch Markers are similar to "time ticks" and are produced and distributed by a dedicated system, the Epoch Bell.
Actors in a system that receive Epoch Markers do not have to track freshness using their own understanding of time (e.g., via a local real-time clock).
Instead, the reception of a certain Epoch Marker establishes a new epoch that is shared between all recipients.

> In essence, the emissions and corresponding receptions of Epoch Markers are like the ticks of a clock where the ticks are conveyed over the Internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In essence, the emissions and corresponding receptions of Epoch Markers are like the ticks of a clock, with these ticks being conveyed over the Internet.
```

While all Epoch Markers share the same core property of behaving like clock ticks in a shared domain, various "Epoch ID" values are defined as Epoch Marker types in this document to accommodate different use cases and diverse kinds of Epoch Bells.

While most Epoch Markers types are encoded in CBOR {{-CBOR}}, and many of the Epoch ID types are themselves encoded in CBOR, a prominent format in this space is the TimeStampToken (TST) defined by {{-TSA}}, a DER-encoded TSTInfo value wrapped in a CMS envelope {{-CMS}}.
TSTs are produced by Time-Stamp Authorities (TSA) and exchanged via the Time-Stamp Protocol (TSP).
At the time of writing, TSAs are the most common providers of secure time-stamping services.
Therefore, reusing the core TSTInfo structure as an Epoch ID type for Epoch Markers is instrumental for enabling smooth migration paths and promote interoperability.
There are, however, several other ways to represent a signed timestamp or the start of a new freshness epoch, respectively, and therefore other Epoch Marker types.

To inform the design, this document discusses a number of interaction models in which Epoch Markers are expected to be exchanged.

> The default top-level structure of Epoch Markers described in this document are CBOR Web Tokens {{-CWT}}.
> An extensible set of Epoch Marker types as well as the `em` CWT Claim to include them in CWTs are specified using CDDL {{-CDDL}}.
> CWTs are signed using {{-COSE}} and come with the advantage of wide tool support.
> Nevertheless, CWTs are not the only vehicle Epoch Markers can be embedded in.
> Epoch Markers can be included in any type of message that allows for embedding opaque bytes or CBOR data items.
> Examples include the Collection CMW in {{-csr-attestation}}, Evidence formats, such as {{TCG-CoEvidence}} or {{-rats-eat}}, {{-rats-ar4si}}, or the CWT Claims Header Parameter of {{-scitt-receipts}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default top-level structure of Epoch Markers described in this document is CBOR Web Tokens {{-CWT}}.
An extensible set of Epoch Marker types, along with the `em` CWT claim to include them in CWTs, is specified using CDDL {{-CDDL}}.
CWTs are signed using COSE {{-COSE}} and benefit from wide tool support.
However, CWTs are not the only containers in which Epoch Markers can be embedded.
Epoch Markers can be included in any type of message that allows for the embedding of opaque bytes or CBOR data items.
Examples include the Collection CMW in {{-csr-attestation}}, Evidence formats such as {{TCG-CoEvidence}} or {{-rats-eat}}, {{-rats-ar4si}}, or the CWT Claims Header Parameter of {{-scitt-receipts}}.
```
